APUB-342: Showcase User Workload Monitoring (#160)
appuio/appuio-cloud-docs: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/tutorials/monitoring/index.adoc

}
--
<1> This definition specifies a Prometheus counter named `fortune_generated_message`
<2> We increment the Prometheus counter at each execution of this function.

== Configuration

For this tutorial, we will need an account at https://pushover.net/[Pushover].

. Open a free account at Pushover, or login into your existing account if you have one; copy your "user key" shown on the user interface.
. Create a new application in the Pushover interface and copy the provided API key.
+
image::monitoring/tutorial/pushover-new-application.png[]

. Download and configure the Pushover mobile app, or open the https://client.pushover.net/[Pushover web client] to receive notifications on your browser.
. Clone the "Monitoring in APPUiO Cloud" demo project https://gitlab.com/vshn/demos/monitoring-in-appuio-cloud[on GitLab].
. Copy the file `variables.example` and rename it `variables`.
. Change the values in the file `variables` to contain the following items:
.. The APPUiO Cloud region where you'll be working.
.. The name of the projects where you'll deploy the Fortune application and Grafana.
.. The Pushover user key and API keys, as shown on the Pushover user interface.
+
[source]
--

> APPUIO_CLOUD_ZONE=cloudscale-lpg-2     (or exoscale-ch-gva-2-0)
> APP_PROJECT=xxxxx-fortune
> GRAFANA_PROJECT=xxxxx-grafana
> PUSHOVER_USER_KEY=xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
> PUSHOVER_API_KEY=xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
> --

Reviewer: ```suggestion
APPUIO_CLOUD_ZONE=cloudscale-lpg-2 <1>
APP_PROJECT=xxxxx-fortune
GRAFANA_PROJECT=xxxxx-grafana
PUSHOVER_USER_KEY=xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
PUSHOVER_API_KEY=xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
--
<1> You can use other APPUiO Cloud Zones too. See https://portal.appuio.cloud/zones for a list of alternatives.
```

NOTE: `AlertmanagerConfig` objects can be configured with a variety of services such as Telegram, Slack, and others. The xref:how-to/configure-alertmanager.adoc[AlertManager configuration page] provides more information.

Follow these steps:

. Execute the following command:
+
[source,bash]
--
oc process -f 2_alerts.yaml --param-file=variables | oc apply -f -
--

. Open the Fortune in Go application on your browser.
. Press the kbd:[R] key for about 20 or 30 seconds while using the Fortune in Go application; your mobile or web Pushover clients should receive a notification in a minute or two.
. During the interaction with the application, the Alert screen on the APPUiO Cloud console will display a message indicating that the alert has been triggered.
+
image::monitoring/tutorial/console-monitoring-alerts-firing.png[]

. The Pushover interface should show that an alert arrived, and the Pushover client should show the notification, including the error message specified in the YAML file.
+
image::monitoring/tutorial/pushover-view-application.png[]
+
image::monitoring/tutorial/pushover-web-client.png[]

> 

Reviewer: Please add a link to the troubleshooting section at https://docs.appuio.cloud/user/how-to/configure-alertmanager.html#troubleshooting.

Author: Done

== Deploy Grafana

The final step consists of deploying and connecting a custom Grafana instance to the Fortune in Go application. Deploying Grafana, once again, requires a Deployment, a Service, and an Ingress object.

. Execute the following commands:
+
[source,bash]
--
oc new-project $GRAFANA_PROJECT
oc process -f 3_grafana.yaml --param-file=variables | oc apply -f -
--

. After a minute or two, open the route generated by the manifest on your browser; you should see the Grafana login screen.
.. Use the `admin` user and `admin` password to log in.
.. Skip the screen asking you to change your password.
. Create a new data source by clicking on the "Add your first data source" button.
.. Select "Prometheus" (first entry on the list)
.. Follow the xref:how-to/use-custom-grafana.adoc[instructions] to configure Prometheus as a data source.
. Get the values of the token and certificates from the deployment.
+
[source,bash]
--

> TOKEN=$(oc get secret $GRAFANA_PROJECT-viewer -ojsonpath={.data.token} | base64 -d)
> CA=$(oc get secret $GRAFANA_PROJECT-viewer -ojsonpath={.data."service-ca\.crt"} | base64 -d)
> echo $CA
> echo "Bearer $TOKEN"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Your Certificat Authority (CA)
oc get secret $GRAFANA_PROJECT-viewer -ojsonpath={.data."service-ca\.crt"} | base64 -d
# Your Bearer HTTP access token
echo "Bearer $(oc get secret $GRAFANA_PROJECT-viewer -ojsonpath={.data.token} | base64 -d)"
```
